few things strike fear
or perhaps loathing
into the hearts of pc enthusiasts more
than the words
windows vista
that operating system's notoriety as a
buggy slow bloated mess
reaches far and wide
even to the land of the apple faithful
vista was aboard its successor windows 7
adored but was vista's heart truly evil
or simply misunderstood
pushed out into a world that wasn't
ready who can say
it is a terrible tale but perhaps its
telling may reveal new secrets
after this word
from our
sponsor memory express is the go-to
place for your electronic needs and
services in canada and they're opening a
new store in victoria bc they're hiring
for all positions so check them out at
the link in the video description
[Music]
so i was reading a post written by
glassbomb on our forum and it inspired a
fairly lively debate in our weekly
writers meeting was windows vista really
that bad you ask a dozen people you'll
get a dozen different answers the one
thing we all agreed on though was that
to answer the question fairly we would
have to get our hands on an iso and
actually install it on a system and we
chose the 150 gaming pc that riley and i
put together
mostly because it's from 2007 the year
that windows vista launched and
how is it well
surprisingly it works pretty well uh
system processes are
snappy and
despite the outdated kind of janky
looking ui
it's
for better or for worse
windows running just fine in fact it
looks almost exactly like windows 7.
so how is it different
than from windows 7 and what's so bad
about it well the answer requires some
history
development of windows longhorn actually
named after the longhorn saloon and
grill in whistler bc represent began in
2001 the year that windows xp was
launched longhorn was supposed to launch
in 2003 but a number of issues during
development left microsoft conflicted
about which features to include in the
new operating system and which ones to
add to windows xp and windows server
things got so complicated that in 2004
development was effectively reset as
team leaders changed and much of the
code was scrapped and repurposed
this was also when longhorn's product
name was finalized to vista with a
tagline of clear confident and connected
none of which had described vistas
development so far perhaps they were
trying to ask the universe to throw them
a freaking bone there's actually a lot
more i could say about the development
but frankly we could make a whole video
about that so
let's just leave it at the launch was
delayed a few more times bones were not
thrown and then finally on january 30th
2007 vista made its public debut and
that's really when the excrement hit the
air circulation unit so to speak you see
vista had a ton of new tricks up its
sleeve including the graphics intensive
aero ui with translucency effects and
elements of the windows back end that
had been completely redone so the
hardware requirements were higher than
probably anyone expected which meant
that at launch vista was slower than its
predecessor on equivalent hardware so
users accused microsoft of packing the
os full of bloat as part of a conspiracy
to force them to upgrade their computers
not that that would necessarily lead to
a better experience anyway making its
own foot more full of bullet holes than
necessary microsoft allowed many
pre-built pcs brand new ones mind you to
be sold with vista capable branding on
the front that they created but these
pcs only met the requirements for vista
home basic the second of these six
different
very confusing editions of this software
that existed and because of this
particular misstep microsoft actually
got served a class action lawsuit for
misleading marketing
on top of everything so far many
component and peripheral vendors didn't
release updated drivers for vista for
their older or in some cases even their
existing products
so many users having experienced the
relatively seamless migrations between
various versions of windows 9x or 2000
to xp where drivers could in many cases
be used interchangeably were outraged
when particularly their wireless cards
and printers just
didn't work anymore as for the hardware
components that did work well because
the drivers were so fundamentally
different from the xp versions requiring
extensive rewrites in many cases
even key system components from
reputable vendors like graphics cards
from nvidia were prone to causing whole
system crashes
even when it was running normally vista
managed to generate user ir too while
the new user account control feature
which prompted users for permissions to
run programs and change settings was a
great step forward for system security
it appeared far too often and took
control of the entire windows interface
until it could be dismissed annoying and
confusing regular end users who just
wanted the annoying pop-ups to stop so
they could get their work done
and this is only a fraction of the
complaints it truly was a horrible
launch and you could argue that it
directly resulted in apple increasing
their os 10 market share thanks to their
wildly successful mac versus pc
commercials
now some of the issues were addressed in
service pack 1 for vista which launched
a year later in 2008 but you know what
else launched in 2008
service pack 3 for windows xp which
understandably left users confused about
whether they should upgrade or just
stick with xp
april 2009 then saw the release of
service pack 2 for vista which addressed
even more issues but by then we were 5
months away from everyone's favorite os
windows 7 which whether you want to
admit it or not
is very similar to windows vista with
many of the improvements in performance
and driver compatibility coming about
simply because hardware in 2009 was
better and driver developers had gained
a lot of experience working with windows
vista
and seven which were far more similar
under the hood than xp and vista were
because like it or not in some cases
vista wasn't bad as much as it was
misunderstood and maybe a little ahead
of its time it was the beginning of a
lot of really good stuff that we take
for granted today for example its all
new memory management model used free
ram to load frequently used programs and
files in the background to smooth out
operation users didn't understand this
they just thought that windows was
hogging up all of their ram for no
apparent reason and arguably
microsoft could have done a better job
of representing this as for windows aero
with its cool translucency effects well
it ran on the system's gpu so if you had
a discrete graphics card and you weren't
experiencing crashes which not everyone
did by the way i didn't it ran very
smoothly and looked so good that going
back to the old way with windows xp felt
like caveman stuff fun fact today
elements of arrow's translucent effects
can be seen in all sorts of other uis
from windows 10 to mac os to ios and as
for the sidebar with its
gadgets that looks pretty laughable with
our modern design sensibilities but it
was pretty trendy at the time
apple's os x tiger also had widget mini
apps although they were kept on the
dashboard not the desktop and live
updating ui elements are now ubiquitous
in modern os's including the live tiles
in the windows start menu so those were
kind of cool until a critical
vulnerability was discovered that could
leave your pc open to hackers
oops and guess what else vista added
instant search from the taskbar built-in
windows defender built-in windows update
user-friendly data backup bitlocker
drive encryption user account control
which in its modern more refined form is
an essential part of windows security
and what's funny is that os 10 these
days or mac os excuse me has something
pretty similar it also added directx 10
and games for windows live which for all
its faults was one of the first ways to
enable game play between a console and a
pc not to mention the completely
redesigned print display peer-to-peer
networking and audio subsystems that
laid the foundation for windows 7 and
its successors though i do have some
issues with the changes they made to
audio that effectively killed hardware
accelerated sound that's kind of a
separate note though
so
was vista
that bad
yes
and also no
which together makes
yo because
yo man for real
for all its faults and there were many
windows vista was a huge if wobbly step
in the right direction and once it had
settled in and received proper support
users seemed to appreciate it in fact in
2008 a few months after releasing vista
service pack 1 microsoft ran an ad
campaign called the mojave experiment in
which they invited users to vent about
how much they hated vista and then try
out windows mojave the next version of
windows and surprise surprise people
actually loved it and then cue the
reveal mojave isn't mojave it's vista
really
are you serious
this is windows vista now were people's
reactions cherry picked to only include
the good ones
duh of course
but based on my experience running vista
from day one on what was at the time a
high-end system i don't find it hard to
believe at all that some people
genuinely liked it or even really liked
it its main issue i think is that by the
time it had really gotten to the point
where it was usable windows 7 was right
around the corner and vista's reputation
had been irreparably damaged so despite
the tech and feature advancements vista
will
and should continue to go down in
history as the worst windows launch ever
other than windows me
just get colder in here
by the way guys just in case this story
has convinced you to try to install
vista and use it perhaps out of pity
please don't microsoft's support for the
os ended last year and while we were
using it like pretty much everything was
covered in these like scary gigantic end
of support messages so it's it's not a
secure thing to do
if you're a small business owner or a
freelancer freshbooks is the accounting
solution for you it's a simple way to be
more productive more organized and to
get paid faster so you're spending less
of your time fussing over your expenses
and your accounts receivable and more
time actually doing your work you can
create and send professional looking
invoices in less than 30 seconds you can
set up online payments in just a couple
of clicks to get paid up to four days
faster you can see when your client has
seen your invoice to put an end to the
guessing games and you can take the
whole experience with you on the go with
their fully featured ios and android
apps for an unrestricted 30-day free
trial go to
www.freshbooks.com forward slash tech
tips we're going to have that linked
below and enter linus tech tips in the
how did you hear about us section so
thanks for watching guys if you disliked
this video you can hit that button but
if you liked it because you love windows
vista
hit the like button get subscribed and
maybe consider checking out where to buy
the stuff we featured at the link in the
video description
also down there is our merch store which
has cool shirts like this one and our
community forum which you should totally
join
maybe it was a little bit of fondness